## Output of a Monitoring Plugin
The output of a Monitoring Plugin consists of two parts on the first level, the *Exit Code* and
output in textual form on _stdout_.

### Exit Code
The *Monitoring Plugin* MUST make use of the *Exit Code* as a method to communicate a result to
the *Monitoring System*. Since the *Exit Code* is more or less standardized over different systems
as an integer number with a width of or greater than 8bit, the following mapping is used:

| *Exit Code* (numerical) | Meaning (short) | Meaning (extended) |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 0 | OK | The execution of the *Monitoring Plugin* proceeded as planned and whatever it test appeared to function properly and the measured values are with their respective thresholds |
| 1 | WARNING | The execution of the *Monitoring Plugin* proceeded as planned and whatever it test appeared to *not* function properly or the measured values are *not* with their respective thresholds. The problem(s) do(es) *not* seem exceptionally grave though and do(es) *not* require immediate attention |
| 2 | CRITICAL | The execution of the *Monitoring Plugin* proceeded as planned and whatever it test appeared to *not* function properly or the measured values are *not* with their respective thresholds. The problem(s) *do(es)* seem exceptionally grave though and *do(es)* require immediate attention |
| 3 | UNKNOWN | The execution of the *Monitoring Plugin* *did not* proceed as planned. The reasons might be manifold, e.g. missing permissions, missing libraries, no available network connection to the destination, etc.. In summary: The *Monitoring Plugin* could *not* determine the state of whatever it should have been checking and can therefore make no reliable statement about it. |
| 4-255 | reserved for future use |

### Textual Output
The original purpose of the output on _stdout_ was to provide human readable information for the user of the *Monitoring System*,
a way for the *Monitoring Plugin* to communicate further details on what happened.
This purpose still exists, but was expanded with the, so called, *perfdata* (performance data) to allow the machine readable
communication of measured values for further processing in the *Monitoring System*, e.g. for the creation of diagrams.

Therefore the further explanation is split into *human readable output* and *perfdata*.

#### Human readable output
This part of the output should give an user information about the state of the test and, in the case of problems, ideally hint what
the origin of the problem might be or what the symptoms are. If the test relies on numeric values, this might be displayed to
give an user more information about the specific problem.
It might consist of one or more lines of printable symbols.

Examples:
```
Remaining space on filesystem "/" is OK

Sensor temperature is within thresholds

Available Memory is too low

Sensore temperature exceeds thresholds
```
are OK, but
```
Remaining space on filesystem "/" is OK ( 62GiB / 128GiB )

Sensor temperature is within thresholds ( 42°C )

Available Memory is too low ( 126MiB / 32GiB )

Sensor temperature exceeds thresholds ( 78°C > 70°C )
```
are better.

Although no strict guidelines for creating this part of the output can really be given, a developer should
keep a potential user in mind. It might, for example, be OK to put the output in a single line if there are
only one or two items of a similar type (think: multiple file systems, multiple sensors, etc.) are present,
but not if there 10 or 100, although this might present a valid use case.
If there are several different items exists in the output of the *Monitoring Plugin*, furthermore called *partial results*,
they probably SHOULD be given their own line in the output.

#### Performance data
In addition to the human readable part the output can contain machine readable measurement values. These data points
are separated from the human readable part by the "|" symbol which is in effect until the end of the output.
The performance data then MUST consist of space separated single values, these MUST have the following format:

`'label'=value[UOM][;warn[;crit[;min[;max]]]]`

with the following definitions:

 1. _label_ must consist of at least on non-space character, but can otherwise contain any printable characters except for the equals sign (`=`) or single quotes (`'`).
 If it contains spaces, it must be surrounded by single quotes
 2. _value_ is a numerical value, might be either an integer or a floating point number. Using floating point numbers if the value is really discreet SHOULD be avoided. Also the
 representation of a floating point number SHOULD NOT use the "scientific notation" (e.g. `6.02e23` or `-3e-45`), since some systems might not be able to parse them correctly.
 Also values with a base other then 10 SHOULD be avoided (see below for more information on `Byte` values).
 3. _UOM_ is the _Unit of measurement_ (e.g. "B" for _Bytes_, "s" for seconds) which gives more context to the _Monitoring System_.
    - The following constraints MUST be applied:
      1. An _UOM_ of `%` MUST be used for percentage values
      2. An _UOM_ of `c` MUST be used for continuous counters (commonly used for the sum of bytes transmitted on an interface)

    - The following recommendations SHOULD be applied:
      1. The _UOM_ for `Byte` values is `B` and although many systems do understand units like
      `KB`,`KiB`, `MB`, `GB`, `TB` they SHOULD be avoided, at the least to avoid the ugly hassle about
      people misinterpreting the *base10* values as *base2* values and the other way round.
      This is also a prime example where floating point number SHOULD NOT be used, since there are
      obviously only integer numbers included.
      2. The _UOM_ for time is `s`, meaning seconds, SI-Prefixes (e.g. `ms` for milli seconds) are allowed if
      necessary or useful, but be aware, that many systems may not understand `μs` for micro seconds and expect
      `us` instead.
      3. In general, SI units and SI prefixes SHOULD be used as _UOM_ if applicable, but the _Monitoring System_
      may not understand them correctly (mostly in uncommon cases), in that cases appropriate workarounds
      MAY be applied on the side of the _Monitoring Plugin_, but it would be nice make the developer
      of the _Monitoring System_ aware of the problem. Since the values are not intented to be human
	  readable normalized units are recommended (e.g. `overall_power=14000000000W` instead of `overall_power=14GW`)

 4. _warn_ and _crit_ are the threshold values for this measurement, which may have been given by the user as input, may be hardcoded in the _Monitoring Plugin_
 or may be retrieved from a file or a device or somewhere else during the execution of the tests. The unit used MUST be the same as for _value_.
 These values are not simple numbers, but _[range expressions](../definitions/01.range_expressions)_.
 5. _min_ and _max_ are the minimal respectively the maximal value the _value_ could possibly be. The unit is the same as for _value_.
 These values can be omitted, if the _value_ is a percentage value, since _min_ and _max_ are always `0` and `100` in this case.
